#format dojo_rst

dojo.cldr
=========

:Status: Draft
:Version: 1.0
:Project owner: Adam Peller
:Available: since 1.0?

.. contents::
   :depth: 2

Contains data from the Common Locale Data Repository (CLDR) http://unicode.org/cldr with associated utility classes

============
Introduction
============

This data contains tables with culturally sensitive information for hundreds of languages and country variants, such as translations of days of the week, months of the year, patterns for formatting dates and numbers. This is used by dojo.date, dojo.number, and dojo.currency to produce localized output. The nls/ directory contains a subset of the available locales; a complete set is available by running the ant script in util/buildscripts/cldr.  See the section "Buildscripts" below for more information.


=====
Usage
=====

The data is transformed from XML data to JSON-style Javascript you see under the nls/ directory. They are used by other modules in core Dojo such as dojo.date, dojo.number and dojo.currency. It usually is not necessary to use dojo.cldr directly.

Monetary data
-------------

dojo.cldr.monetary.getData(code)
  returns a mapping of currency code to currency-specific formatting information. Returns a unique object with properties: places, round

  =========  ======  =======================================================
  Parameter  Type    Description
  =========  ======  =======================================================
  code       String  an `ISO 4217 currency code <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_4217>`_
  =========  ======  =======================================================


.. code-block :: javascript
 :linenos:

 <script type="text/javascript">
   // load monetary data:
   dojo.require("dojo.cldr.monetary");
   // the ISO 4217 currency code for Belarusian ruble:
   var iso = 'BYR';
   // get monetary data:
   var cldrMonetary = dojo.cldr.monetary.getData(iso);
 </script>


Currency data
-------------

.. code-block :: javascript
 :linenos:

 <script type="text/javascript">
   // load currency data:
   dojo.requireLocalization("dojo.cldr", "currency");
   // get currency data:
   var cldrCurrency = dojo.i18n.getLocalization("dojo.cldr", "currency", options.locale) || {};
 </script>


Number data
-----------

.. code-block :: javascript
 :linenos:

 <script type="text/javascript">
   // load number data:
   dojo.requireLocalization("dojo.cldr", "number");
   var cldrNumber= dojo.i18n.getLocalization("dojo.cldr", "number", locale);
 </script>


dojo.cldr.supplemental
----------------------

dojo.cldr.supplemental.getFirstDayOfWeek(locale)
  Returns a zero-based index for first day of the week, as used by the local (Gregorian) calendar. 
  e.g. Sunday (returns 0), or Monday (returns 1)

  =========  ======  =======================================================
  Parameter  Type    Description
  =========  ======  =======================================================
  locale     String  The locale to assume for loading localized resources in this page, specified according to `RFC 3066 <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3066.txt>`_. Must be specified entirely in lowercase, e.g. `en-us` and `zh-cn`. See the documentation for `dojo.i18n <dojo/i18n>`_ and `dojo.requireLocalization <dojo/requireLocalization>`_ for details on loading localized resources. If no locale is specified, Dojo assumes the browser's user locale as defined by `dojo.locale <dojo/locale>`_.
  =========  ======  =======================================================

dojo.cldr.supplemental.getWeekend(locale)
  Returns a hash containing the start and end days of the weekend.

  =========  ======  =======================================================
  Parameter  Type    Description
  =========  ======  =======================================================
  locale     String  The locale to assume for loading localized resources in this page, specified according to `RFC 3066 <http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3066.txt>`_. Must be specified entirely in lowercase, e.g. `en-us` and `zh-cn`. See the documentation for `dojo.i18n <dojo/i18n>`_ and `dojo.requireLocalization <dojo/requireLocalization>`_ for details on loading localized resources. If no locale is specified, Dojo assumes the browser's user locale as defined by `dojo.locale <dojo/locale>`_.
  =========  ======  =======================================================


Buildscripts in util/buildscripts/cldr
--------------------------------------

The scripts in this directory are responsible for generating the data tables in dojo/cldr/nls. Dojo provides a subset of this output in dojo/cldr/nls under source control, the rest must be generated by the developer using these scripts.

To trigger generation of a full set of locale resources, change into the directory util/buildscripts/cldr and simply type "ant".  An optional list of locales may be specified as an ant property to limit the set of locales built. Currencies may also be specified, but a default list is included in the ant script.

NOTE: it is currently necessary to perform a one-time installation of the Saxon XSLT processor in ~/.ant/lib due to classpath issues and workarounds.  The ant task will do this for you. Also, ant version 1.6.5 is recommended. The build script does not properly resolve the XSLT catalog with newer versions of ant which makes the process take much longer. See ticket #7969


========
Examples
========

Programmatic example
--------------------

TODO: example

Declarative example
-------------------

TODO: example


========
See also
========

* `dojo.date.locale <dojo/date/locale>`_
