util/index.rst, before:

#format dojo_rst

Util
=====

The util/ directory is different than dojo/dijit/dojox in that it doesn't contain javascript code that accessed directly from web pages.   Rather, it contains utility scripts as listed below.


`Dojo Build System <build/index>`_
-----------------------------------

The Dojo build system is used to create efficient optimized packages of JavaScript and CSS, customized for a given application or website. You can take advantage of this powerful tool to help structure your development and speed up your applications.

See also the documentation on `custom builds <quickstart/custom-builds>`_, about how to make optimized builds based on which dojo modules you are using.


`ShrinkSafe <shrinksafe/index>`_
---------------------------------

A standalone utility for compressing JavaScript, used by the Dojo Build System as an optional compression step, though can be used on individual files manually.


`DOH <quickstart/doh>`_
-----------------------
DOH is the test harness used by dojo, similar to JUnit.

The util/doh/ directory also contains DOH robot (`robot doc part1 <http://o.dojotoolkit.org/2008/08/11/doh-robot-automating-web-ui-unit-tests-real-user-events>`_,
`robot doc part2 <http://o.dojotoolkit.org/2008/10/31/doh-robot-part-2-automating-acceptance-tests-and-user-stories>`_), which allows automated keyboard/mouse testing.

TODO: copy DOH robot doc into this wiki.


`The Dojo API Doc System <util/doctools>`_
-------------------------------------------

Dojo uses a custom inline comment syntax which produces well structured xml, and powers the official `API Docs <http://api.dojocampus.org/>`_ .

The doc system is powered by the docscripts/ directory, where generate.php extracts the inline documentation into an api.xml file, and the jsdoc/ directory, which generates web pages to display the doc.



`Checkstyle <util/checkstyle>`_
---------------------------------

A standalone utility for checking JavaScript files for violations of the Dojo style guide. Also includes an online tool for automatically fixing the majority of style guide violations.


Migration
---------
The migration directory contains scripts for helping to migrate from older versions of dojo to newer ones.

Commit message:

copied DOH robot docs into this wiki

util/index.rst, after:

#format dojo_rst

Util
=====

The util/ directory is different than dojo/dijit/dojox in that it doesn't contain javascript code that accessed directly from web pages.   Rather, it contains utility scripts as listed below.


`Dojo Build System <build/index>`_
-----------------------------------

The Dojo build system is used to create efficient optimized packages of JavaScript and CSS, customized for a given application or website. You can take advantage of this powerful tool to help structure your development and speed up your applications.

See also the documentation on `custom builds <quickstart/custom-builds>`_, about how to make optimized builds based on which dojo modules you are using.


`ShrinkSafe <shrinksafe/index>`_
---------------------------------

A standalone utility for compressing JavaScript, used by the Dojo Build System as an optional compression step, though can be used on individual files manually.


`DOH <quickstart/doh>`_
-----------------------
DOH is the test harness used by dojo, similar to JUnit.  (TODO: add documentation)

The util/doh/ directory also contains `DOH Robot <util/dohrobot>`_, an API used in conjunction with DOH for automated keyboard/mouse testing.


`The Dojo API Doc System <util/doctools>`_
-------------------------------------------

Dojo uses a custom inline comment syntax which produces well structured xml, and powers the official `API Docs <http://api.dojocampus.org/>`_ .

The doc system is powered by the docscripts/ directory, where generate.php extracts the inline documentation into an api.xml file, and the jsdoc/ directory, which generates web pages to display the doc.



`Checkstyle <util/checkstyle>`_
---------------------------------

A standalone utility for checking JavaScript files for violations of the Dojo style guide. Also includes an online tool for automatically fixing the majority of style guide violations.


Migration
---------
The migration directory contains scripts for helping to migrate from older versions of dojo to newer ones.
