.. _releasenotes/1.12:

=======================
Dojo 1.12 Release Notes
=======================

.. contents ::
   :depth: 3

User Agent Support
==================

The following user agents have been tested and are supported in this release. If a user agent version is not listed as
supported, it still may work, especially on browsers with rapid release cycles (Chrome, Firefox). Future minor releases
of Dojo might include fixes to support future releases of these browsers, but it is not guaranteed.

**Desktop**

* Edge 12

* Firefox 3.6-50

* Safari 6-10

* Chrome 13-54

* IE 8-11

* Opera 10.50-12 (Dojo core only). Blink-based versions of Opera should work like Chrome, but are not officially tested or supported for this release.

**Mobile (dojox/mobile)**

* iOS (Mobile Safari), 6.x, 7.x, 8.x, 9.x, and 10.x (including all Dijit widgets except Editor)

* Android (Android Browser and Chrome) 2.3, 4.0-4.4, 5.0-5.1, 6.0, and 7.0 (Platform browser and Chrome browser) (including all Dijit widgets for Android 4.0-4.4 except Editor)

* BlackBerry 6-7 & 10 (Platform browser)

* Windows Phone 8 (IE10)

* Mobile compatibility on desktop browsers: Edge 12, IE 8-11, Firefox 4-50, Chrome 13-54


**Server-Side User Agents**

* Node 0.10.X, 0.12.x, 4.x, 5.x, 6.x

General
=======

* Update language in documentation to reflect Dojo Foundation being superseded by the JS Foundation.
* Upgraded Trac to 1.0.9, fixing issues with tickets that threw a ``UnicodeEncodeError``.

Dojo Core
=========

csp
---

* Fixed unsafe-eval violation in CSP mode.

declare
-------

* Fixed declare only merges "-chains-" in mixins (not superclasses).

dnd
---

* Fixed an issue where Drag n Drop did not work only on Windows 10 IE11.
* Updated autoscroll to allow scrolling in one direction.

dom-construct
-------------

* Fixed test that would previously hang in the dom-construct suite.

i18n
----

* Fixed an issue that executed ``getLocalization`` before the nls bundle is completely preloaded.
* Fixed month parsing for locales with spaces in their month names (such as Vietnamese).
* Fixed i18n's ``evalBundle`` from causing unsafe-eval errors when used with ``async: true`` and ``has("csp-restrictions")``.
* Fixed module preloading nls resources from a build cache when ``dojo-preload-i18n-Api`` is disabled in the Dojo config.

number
------

* Fixed an issue where dojo would delete a local variable.

parser
------

* Fixed an error that would cause Dojo to not load in an iframe in Firefox when ``display: none;`` was set.

request
-------

* Fixed inconsistent request handling of ``{ data: undefined }`` on IE11/Chrome/Firefox.

Dijit
=====

* Fixed regexp in the interactive benchmark tool.
* Enabled ``BackgroundIframe`` in IE11 on both Windows 8.1 and 10.
* Added ``aria-label`` for each grid cell in :ref:`dijit/Calendar <dijit/Calendar>`.
* Enabled :ref:`dijit/CalendarLite <dijit/CalendarLite>` to accept January 1, 1970 00:00:00 as a valid date.

Editor
------

* Fixed an issue in Firefox where a notification to use the keyboard with cut/copy/paste depended on a specific exception being thrown.

Form
----

* Enhanced :ref:`dijit/form/TextBox <dijit/form/TextBox>` to allow masking of password.

Layout
------

* Fixed an issue where the 'dijitTabPane' class was not removed from child when removed from
  :ref:`dijit/layout/TabContainer <dijit/layout/TabContainer>`.

Tree
----

* Fixed a bug that caused an error to occur when deleting a mouse-focused tree node.

DojoX
=====

* Fixed an improperly scoped global function ``index`` in dojox/rpc/Rest.
* Fixed a possible XSS attack vector within analytics/logger/dojoxAnalytics.php.
* Updated a regexp within dojox.validate.creditCard to extend MasterCard range validation.
* Allow setting a DOM node as the target of a Standby.

Charting
--------

* Improved pie chart rendering, particularly when column labels are used.
* Fix text node dimensions in Firefox when ``dojo-bidi`` is set to true.

DTL
---

* Fixed a regression in the dtl rendering.

Grid
----

* Fixed a regression with declarative grids and stores not rendering since 1.10.5.
* Fixed declarative dojox.grid.DataGrid column declaration rendering errors.

Mobile
------

* Aligned selected and unselected checkboxes in dojox/mobile in Edge.
* Fixed horizontal dojox/mobile/Slider event propogation, resulting in becoming unusable in a horizontal dojox/mobile/ScrollablePane.

Util
====

Build System
------------

* Updated Closure Compiler to v20160713 to support ES6 grammar. Added ``compilationLevel`` option to ``optimizeOptions``. Added all compilation level set functions to ``optimizeOptions``. Added ``languageOut`` option to ``optimizeOptions``. Updated ``languageIn`` and ``languageOut`` options to use ``fromString`` enum function. Updated documentation accordingly.
* Fixed hardcoded ``./util/..`` paths so they don't break scripts elsewhere within Dojo when installed via NPM.
* Fixed build profiles including themes package.

Test Framework
--------------

* Fixed a context error that caused doh to crash if ``doh.Deferred`` was returned from ``runTest`` AND an error was thrown in ``tearDown``.
* Add the ability for the doh runner to specify .html tests in the URL.

Demos
=====

Migration Notes
===============
