.. _releasenotes/1.9:

======================
Dojo 1.9 Release Notes
======================

.. contents ::
   :depth: 3

User Agent Support
==================

The following user agents have been tested and are supported in this release. If a user agent version is not listed as
supported, it still may work, especially on browsers with rapid release cycles (Chrome, Firefox). Future minor releases
of Dojo might include fixes to support future releases of these browsers, but it is not guaranteed:

**Desktop**

* Firefox 3.6-17

* Safari 5-6

* Chrome 13-23

* IE 8-10

* Opera 10.50-12 (Dojo core only)

**Mobile (dojox/mobile)**

* iOS 4.x, 5.x (Mobile Safari) and 6.x (including all Dijit widgets except Editor)

* Android 2.2-2.3, 3.1-3.2, 4.0-4.2 (Platform browser)

* BlackBerry 6-7 & 10 (Platform browser)

* Mobile compatibility on desktop browsers: IE 8-10, Firefox 4-17, Safari 5-6, Chrome 13-23

TODO: Link to page with specific vendor device models tested on

**Server-Side User Agents**

* Node 0.6.X, 0.8.X

Dojo Core
=========

dojo/node
---------

``dojo/node`` now properly loads CommonJS modules that depend on modules that support both CommonJS and AMD but assume
that if and AMD environment is detected, don't return anything for the CommonJS module
(`#16414 <http://bugs.dojotoolkit.org/ticket/16414>`_).

dojo/parser
-----------

The parser now supports the ability to pass a context ``require()`` when parsing a document via adding it to the
``options`` hash passed during parse (`#16112 <http://bugs.dojotoolkit.org/ticket/16112>`_).  This allows for the use
of relative MIDs to be used, specifically in Widget templates.

Dijit
=====

dijit and dojo/domReady!
------------------------
Dijit has been upgraded to be able to work with the dojo/domReady! plugin.
Previously using dojo/ready was recommended, but now using dojo/domReady! is recommended.
The only caveat is that if you are using the parser and
have custom javascript code to run, you should run the parser manually rather than setting parseOnLoad:true.

Example usage:

.. js ::

   define(["dojo/parser", "dojo/store/Memory", "dojo/domReady!], function(parser, Memory){
      // script code that needs to run before parse
      myMemoryStore = new Memory(...);
      ...

      parser.parse();

      // script code that needs to run after parse
      ...
   });

dijit/_AttachMixin
------------------
:ref:`dijit/_AttachMixin <dijit/_AttachMixin>` is a new mixin to perform the data-dojo-attach-point and
data-dojo-attach-event hookup normally done by :ref:`dijit/_TemplatedMixin <dijit/_TemplatedMixin>`.
It's useful for custom widgets where the template is
(always) expanded on the server, so on the client you just need to hookup the attach points and event listeners.

dijit/_KeyNavMixin
------------------
:ref:`dijit/_KeyNavMixin <dijit/_KeyNavMixin>` is a new mixin to enable keyboard navigation between a widget's descendants.
Navigation can be performed via arrow keys and HOME/END keys, and also a letter key search.
:ref:`dijit/Tree <dijit/Tree>` and :ref:`dijit/form/Select <dijit/form/Select>` are examples of widgets that extend _KeyNavMixin.

It's similar to :ref:`dijit/_KeyNavContainer <dijit/_KeyNavContainer>` but can be user for any widgets,
not just subclasses of :ref:`dijit/_Container <dijit/_Container>`.

dijit/_TemplatedMixin
---------------------
:ref:`dijit/_TemplatedMixin <dijit/_TemplatedMixin>` has a new _rendered parameter to the constructor, that's useful
for when standard widgets have
`their templates pre-expanded on the server <http://jamesthom.as/blog/2013/01/15/server-side-dijit/>`_.

Expected usage is to have markup like below on your main page:

.. html ::

    <div class="dijit dijitReset dijitInline dijitLeft" id="widget_fname" role="presentation"
        data-dojo-type="dijit/form/TextBox" data-dojo-props="_rendered: true, id: 'fname', name: 'fname'"
	    ><div class="dijitReset dijitInputField dijitInputContainer"
		    ><input class="dijitReset dijitInputInner" data-dojo-attach-point='textbox,focusNode' autocomplete="off"
			    name="fname" type="text"
	    /></div
    ></div>


dijit/_WidgetsInTemplateMixin
-----------------------------

The ``_WidgetsInTemplateMixin`` supports using relative MIDs in the widget template (
`#16112 <http://bugs.dojotoolkit.org/ticket/16112>`_).  For example the following is now valid:

.. js ::

   define(["require", "dojo/_base/declare", "dijit/_WidgetBase", "dijit/_TemplatedMixin",
      "dijit/_WidgetsInTemplateMixin", "./OtherWidget"],
   function(require, declare, _WidgetBase, _TemplatedMixin, _WidgetsInTemplateMixin){
      return declare([_WidgetBase, _TemplatedMixin, _WidgetsInTemplateMixin], {
         templateString: '<div><div data-dojo-type="./OtherWidget"></div></div>',
         contextRequire: require
      });
   });

Also, ``dijit/InlineEditBox`` and ``dijit/_editor/plugins/FontChoice`` were updated to take advantage of this new
feature.

**Note** Because of the synchronous nature of the widget lifecycle, you still have to require in any modules used in the
template, as the auto-require feature will not work properly with widgets.

dijit/BackgroundIframe
----------------------

There's now a "config-bgIframe" ``has()`` flag that can be used to explicitly turn on/off the background iframe behind
popups that's useful when a page contains applets, and also for older versions of IE with the bleed through select
problem.

Usage is:

.. html ::

	<script type="text/javascript" src="../../dojo/dojo.js"
	  data-dojo-config="has: {'config-bgIframe': true}"></script>

It can also be specified as a build parameter in the staticHasFlags section.

By default it's turned on for desktop pages, but turned off for mobile.

dijit/Declaration
-----------------

Declaration now supports ``<script type="dojo/aspect">``, in addition to the ``<script type="dojo/connect">`` syntax
which is now deprecated (and will be removed for 2.0). For example:

.. html ::

	<div data-dojo-type="dijit/Declaration" data-dojo-props='widgetClass:"MyWidget"'>
		<script type="dojo/aspect" data-dojo-method="startup" data-dojo-advice="before">
			// ...
		</script>
   </div>

DojoX
=====

dojox/mobile
------------

*Features*

   * dojox/mobile data-aware lists now support an itemRenderer property allowing 
     to change the type of ``ListItem`` instances created by the list.
   * dojox/mobile list widgets now provide filtering capabilities.
     For details, see :ref:`dojox/mobile/FilteredListMixin <dojox/mobile/FilteredListMixin>`.
   * dojox/mobile editable list widgets now have callback functions on user actions.
     For details, see :ref:`dojox/mobile/RoundRectList <dojox/mobile/RoundRectList#editable-list-example>` and 
     :ref:`dojox/mobile/EdgeToEdgeList <dojox/mobile/EdgeToEdgeList#editable-list-example>`.
   * Internet Explorer 10 is now supported "natively" (that is, without compatibility code
     and CSS): since IE10 supports CSS3 transitions, animations and gradients,
     compatibility mode is disabled for IE10, and Dojo Mobile uses the non-prefixed CSS3
     properties supported by IE10 in addition to the webkit-prefixed properties.
   * FormLayout container: a responsive container for creating mobile forms.
   * The user agent tests that were previously done in ``dojox/mobile/sniff`` have been
     moved to ``dojo/sniff``, so the use of ``dojox/mobile/sniff`` is deprecated,
     You should now use ``dojo/sniff`` instead. The ``dojox/mobile/sniff`` module is still present
     in this release for compatibility, but it will be removed in a future release.
   * The ``has("ios")`` feature test defined in ``dojo/sniff`` now returns the iOS version
     (instead of a Boolean). In previous versions, you used ``has("iphone")`` to detect
     any iOS device (iPhone, iPad or iPod). You should now use ``has("ios")`` instead.
     The ``dojox/mobile/sniff`` module still sets the ``"iphone"`` feature to the iOS version
     on all iOS devices for compatibility, but in future releases it will be set only
     for an iPhone device. 
   * The ``dojox/mobile/RoundRectStoreList`` and ``dojox/mobile/EdgeToEdgeStoreList`` widgets
     now support updating existing store items. When a ``put`` operation is performed on the store,
     the corresponding list item is updated with the new properties of the store item. A new
     ``onAdd`` method has been added to ``dojox/mobile/_StoreMixin`` to better distinguish add
     and put operations.
   * To address performance problems with very long lists in scrollable views, a new
     ``dojox/mobile/LongListMixin`` module has been added. This module can be mixed in any Dojo Mobile
     list (``dojox/mobile/RoundRectList``, ``dojox/mobile/EdgeToEdgeList``, and their data-aware variants)
     using ``data-dojo-mixins="dojox/mobile/LongListMixin"``. This will transparently enable listeners
     on the scrollable view to keep only a subset of the items in the DOM, which will significantly speed up
     scrolling.
   * A subset of widgets (``Button``, ``CheckBox``, ``Heading``, ``ListItem``, ``RadioButton``, 
     ``Slider``, ``Switch``, ``ToggleButton``, and ``View``) can now be templated.
     For details, see :ref:`Templating dojox/mobile widgets <dojox/mobile/templating-mobile-widgets>`.
   * Building themes: A new folder ``dojox/mobile/themes/utils`` now contains scripts and 
     documentation for building  mobile themes. The number of required ``.less`` files for a
     particular theme has been drastically reduced.
   * The 'Custom' theme is now generated from 2 main colors, facilitating the creation of a new theme 
     based on arbitrary colors.
   * The ``dojox/mobile/TabBar`` widget now supports resizing its children so that they evenly fill all the space
     available in the bar. This is done by setting the new attribute "fill" to the value "always".
   * New Android Holo dark theme used by default on Android 3.x and 4.x devices. For 
     backward compatibility, you can force 'Android' theme on all Android devices by 
     configuring ``deviceTheme``:

.. html ::

	<script src="../deviceTheme.js" data-dojo-config="mblUserAgent:navigator.userAgent.match('Android')?'Android':null">

*Incompatibilities*

   * Using the dojox/mobile/scrollable.js module without Dojo is not supported any more.
     The ``dojostub.js`` module, which was provided in ``dojox/mobile/tests`` to emulate some
     Dojo features and let you use ``scrollable.js`` outside of Dojo, is no longer provided.
     The tests for this use case are also removed.
   * The ``endTransition`` method of the ``dojox/mobile/TransitionEvent`` class has been removed
     since it was never called by the dojox/mobile framework.
   * ``dojox/mobile/sniff`` module does not anymore require ``dojo/_base/sniff`` but ``dojo/sniff``.
     This means you can't use anymore ``isXX`` methods (such as ``isIE``); you should use ``has`` 
     flags instead (such as ``has("ie")``).
   * As a consequence of the new support for templating on some widgets (see above), old code that was already
     attempting to mix ``dijit/_TemplatedMixin`` into mobile widgets may not work any more. 
     The new behavior is that, when a widget is templated, Dojo Mobile assumes that the template contains
     the whole widget contents, and no children nodes will be created by the widget code. For example,
     in a templated ``dojox/mobile/ListItem``, the template must contain a ``labelNode`` attach point
     (whereas, in 1.8, the label node was always created internally). So, old code using templates with
     mobile widgets should be modified and the necessary attach points should be added to the templates.

dojox/charting
--------------

*Features*

   * Threshold indicators (dojox/charting/plot2d/Indicator) can now easily be drawn on top of the chart.
   * Axis (dojox/charting/axis2d/Default) now supports rendering ticks inside of the plot area instead of outside of the axis. For that specify a negative length for the ticks.
   * Mouse indicator action (dojox/charting/action2d/MouseIndicator) now supports over mode in addition to mouse drag. The mouse indicator can also be further customized (ability to remove the label, ...).
   * Grids (dojox/charting/plot2d/Grid) now support grid stripes in addition to grid lines.
   * Ability to render labels on data points for Bubble/Columns/Default/Scatter plots by setting labels property to true.
   * Charting bidi features (bi-directional text and mirroring) can be enabled using the dojo-bidi has flag you should not use BidiSupport modules anymore. See `dojox/charting migration`_ for details.
   * Charting now supports bidi mirroring. You can perform mirroring by calling myChart.setDir("rtl") once bidi features have been included using dojo-bidi.

*Incompatibilities*

   * Tooltip on stacked plots now display the value of the hovered data point not of the stacked value. One can go back to previous behavior if needed by customizing the text function of the Tooltip action.
   * Tooltip, highlight and magnify actions are not anymore hardcoded into the spider plot (dojox/charting/plot2d/Spider). One needs to explicitly set them up on the plot to get them activated. See `dojox/charting migration`_ for details.

dojox/app
---------

*Features*

   * dojox/app now provides a build system extension that allows you to easily build your application from the config file.
   * One can now use the `type` property for a view in the config file to specify alternate view class extending dojox/view/ViewBase.
   * Configuration of views now accept a `nls` property to specify an AMD internationalization root module for a view.
   * Custom Layout controller support is available with a dojox/app/controllers/LayoutBase which can be extended with a custom layout controller.
   * Support for a constraint setting on a view in the config has been added, which will add data-app-constraint to the domNode for the view, and place the view into the specified constraint (or region).
   * A new BorderLayout controller has been provided, which uses a dijit/layout/BorderContainer to layout views, and uses constraint settings on views in the config to determine which constraint (or region) a view should be placed into.
   * One can now specify an alternate transition animation function by using the `transit` property in top level section of the configuration file.
   * The activate & deactivate function of the view lifecycle now accept two arguments:
       * respectively the previousView or nextView for the current view at its position
       * a raw data object that can be passed from one view to another by specifying a data attribute in the transition options.
   * Support was added to allow multiple views to be included in the DefaultViews in the config as well as on transitions and the url used in the transition. This allows multiple views to be displayed with different constraints (or regions) at the same time.  It is also now possible to transition views in regions other than the center.  To specify multiple views the view names would listed separated by a "+" for example "view1+view2" or "view1,subviewA+view2".  Support has also been added to be able to use a "-" to hide a view.  So if "view1+view2" are displayed and a transition is requested for "view3-view1" then view3 would be displayed (replacing view2 assuming they have the same constraint) and view1 would be hidden.
   * A new config setting for "transition" has been added to set the transition animation type to use for the view transition. If a "transition" is set on a view or parent it will override the transition set on the transitionEvent or the defaultTransition in the config.
   * Observable support for stores via the config has been added. Setting "observable": true on a store will have the store wrapped in a dojo/store/Observable.
   * dojox/app is changing it's recommendation for the file structure used for an app.  The recommendation now is to place the “controller” (.js files) and the “template” (.html files) in the same folders for related parts of the app. This makes it much easier to reuse code between apps.
   * dojox/app has also changed the default location used for the “controller” when it is not specified for a view in the config.  dojox/app will attempt to find the “controller” using the same name and folder as the “template” file.
   * dojox/app now provides "has" test support for the config file, so there is no longer a need for multiple configs for an app.  In the example below dojox/app/main would process the has sections and merge the appropriate sections into the config.  Properties set on the config at the same level as the has will be replaced by the value set in the has section, and items in an array will be added to config array with the same name and at the same level as the has section. 

.. js ::

	// The app would have code like this:
	require(["dojo/text!"+configurationFile], function(configJson){
		var config = json.fromJson(configJson);
		var width = window.innerWidth || document.documentElement.clientWidth;
		if(width <= 600){
			has.add("phone", true);
		}
		has.add("ie9orLess", has("ie") && (has("ie") <= 9));
		Application(config);
	});


	// The config would include something like this:
	"has" : {
		"phone" : {
			"defaultView": "configuration",
			"isTablet" : false
		},
		"!phone" : {
			"defaultView": "configuration+TestInfo",
			"isTablet" : true
		},
		"ie9orLess" : {
			"controllers": [
				"dojox/app/controllers/HistoryHash"
			]
		},
		"!ie9orLess" : {
			"controllers": [
				"dojox/app/controllers/History"
			]
		}
	},	



*Incompatibilities*

   * data-app-region has been changed to data-app-constraint.
   * The property name used in the config for the view's .js file has been changed from “definition” to “controller”, config files will have to be updated to use "controller" instead of "definition" in the view.
   * Since "+" and "-" can now be used to indicate multiple views on a transition, those characters are no longer allowed in a view name.
   * The events used in the Layout controllers have changed from layout -> app-initLayout and  select -> app-layoutView, and the other events used by dojox/app have also been changed to have an app- prefix for example, load -> app-load, init -> app-init, domNode -> app-domNode, and transition -> app-transition.
   * zIndex is no longer automatically set on views depending upon whether they are in the center or not.  In the past the zIndex was automatically set higher on the left pane of a tablet view to avoid having the transition for the center show over that left pane.
   * In 1.8 dojox/app would automatically require a model and mvc controller if it was listed in the config and not included in the list of dependencies.  In 1.9 the model and mvc controller will need to be listed in the dependencies. For example:

.. js ::

	"dependencies": [
		"dojox/app/utils/simpleModel",
		"dojox/app/utils/mvcModel",
		"dojox/mvc/EditStoreRefListController",
		// ...
	]


*Incompatibilities (continued)*
   * In 1.8 dojox/app would automatically include the Load, Transition and Layout controllers, unless "noAutoLoadControllers" was set to true in the config.  In 1.9 the controllers are no longer automatically loaded, and the noAutoLoadControllers option has been removed.  So the config must include the necessary controllers. For example:

.. js ::

	"controllers": [
		"dojox/app/controllers/Load",
		"dojox/app/controllers/Transition",
		"dojox/app/controllers/Layout",
		"dojox/app/controllers/History"
	]

dojox/calendar
--------------

*Features*

  * Better support of asynchronous stores. Interactive event creation is now working with asynchronous stores (event is added to store at the end of the gesture). Event renderers are notified of the current store state (being created but not added yet to store, being added/updated, in store). An example is available (tests/asynchStore.html)
  * New properties have been added to further customize the the row header of the column view.
  * Grid cells can now be customized either programmatically by providing a custom function (styleGridCellFunc property of views) or by CSS (ex .dojoxCalendarGrid .Wed.H12 { ... } ). See tests/calendarStyleGridCell.html and tests/calendarStyleGridCellCSS.html.
  * Query options to be set when querying the store can now be specified on the calendar using queryOptions property.

*Incompatibilities*

   * In 1.8, the Date constructor was used as last resort to decode a Date string. In 1.9, as it is not reliable, the Date constructor is not used, and time.newDate() will throw an error if parameter is string and it cannot be decoded using ISO decoder (dojo/date/stamp).
   * In 1.8, the renderers life cycle events (onRendererXXXX) have the renderer as parameter. In 1.9, an event is passed as parameter. This event will provide the renderer but also the view where this renderer is used and for "rendererCreated" and "rendererReused" events the data item displayed by this renderer.
   * The ColumnView.styleGridColumn has been renamed into styleGridCell and two arguments have been added.
   * The calendar is now complying with the resize policy of Dojo. If the calendar, and especially the Matrix View, is *not* in a Dijit container or a Dojo mobile container, the application developer must call the resize() method of the calendar (or the view if used as standalone).
   * In 1.8, the itemEditEnd event item property was inconsistent with the other editing events because it was representing the store item instead of the render item. In 1.9, each editing event is containing two properties:
      * item: The render item. To change editing behavior set the startTime and/or endTime of this object.
      * storeItem: the store item. You may want to access some properties of the store item to determine the editing logic.
      * The tests/editing.html shows an example.
   * In 1.8, the dojox.calendar.Calendar methods called isItemEditable, isItemMoveEnabled and isItemResizeEnabled took as first parameter the internal render item which that was not useful. Now the store data item is passed.

dojox/gfx
---------

   * Add dashed stroke support to canvas renderer. If the browser implements the (new) HTML5 dash api (context2d.setLineDash()) then the gfx renderer uses it. Otherwise, it relies on a custom (canvas- specific) implementation.

dojo/treemap
------------
   * Query options to be set when querying the store can now be specified on the treemap using queryOptions property.

Util
====

DOH
---

Support added for returning a ``dojo/promise/Promise`` or ``dojo/Deferred`` from a test fixture.  Before, you could
only return a ``doh.Deferred`` or a ``dojo/_base/Deferred``.

Demos
=====

Migration Notes
===============

dijit/Calendar
--------------

To avoid accessibility issues, the ``dijit/Calendar`` template was changed so that the month name and arrows, plus the
previous, current and next year, are not contained within the ``<table>`` node.   CSS was correspondingly changed.

dijit/_Container::addChild()
----------------------------

In 1.8, the behavior of ``dijit/_Container`` (and subclasses) ``.addChild()`` method was undefined if some of the 
``_Container.containerNode`` direct children were plain DOM nodes, rather than widgets.

Further, if the existing child widgets were not direct children of ``this.containerNode``, then ``.addChild()`` would
tend to place the new widget as a next or previous sibling of an existing child widget, rather than as a direct child of
``this.containerNode``.

In 1.9, ``parent.addChild(widget, n)`` places ``widget.domNode`` as the *n*'th DOMNode child of
``parent.containerNode``, just like ``dojo/dom-construct::place()`` does.

If your application was calling ``parent.addChild()`` on a widget that contained plain DOM nodes, and depending on the
undefined behavior listed above, you may need to update your logic.

In practice though, when ``addChild(widget, n)`` would count to the *n*'th position, it would skip over the plain
DOMNodes and only include the child widgets in the count.

dijit: keypress to keydown
--------------------------

For performance, a number of widgets were changed to use the native keydown event rather than the synthetic (and
deprecated) dojo/_base/connect._keypress event.

This include changes to the template like ``data-dojo-attach-event="onkeydown: _onKeyDown"`` rather than 
``data-dojo-attach-event="onkeypress: _onKeyPress"``, and in the class definitions code renaming ``_onKeyPressed()`` to
``_onKeyDown()``, and accessing ``evt.keyDown`` rather than ``evt.charOrCode``.

Changed widgets:

- Menu (dijit/templates/Menu, DropDownMenu.js, MenuBar.js)
- Slider
- NumberSpinner
- InlineEditBox (onkeypress handler removed, onkeydown not added)
- StackContainer, StackController, TabController, ScrollingTabController
- AccordionContainer (technically, AccordionButton)
- BorderContainer
- Editor

Note that ``_TextBoxMixin`` still creates it's own normalized event object defining ``evt.charOrCode``, and passes it to
``._onInput()``.

dijit Template Changes
----------------------

``dijit/templates/InlineEditBox.html`` and ``dijit/form/robot/DropDownBox.html`` were changed in this release.

If you have subclasses of ``InlineEditBox``, ``ComboBox``, ``FilteringSelect``, or ``DateTextBox`` that have modified
those templates, you may need to update your templates.

dijit/Editor
------------
If you are creating Editor widgets programatically, be sure to call startup() on them.

dojox/charting migration
------------------------

Tooltip, highlight and magnify actions are no longer "hardcoded" into the spider plot
(``dojox/charting/plot2d/Spider``). The need to be explicitly setup on the plot to utilize them, for example:

.. js ::

	new Tooltip(spiderchart);
	new Highlight(spiderchart);
	new Magnify(spiderchart, "default", {duration: 800, scale: 1.5});

Charting bidi features are not anymore enabled by the BidiSupport and BidiSupport3D modules. Instead you should be
using the ``dojo-bidi`` flag.

Replace code like:

.. html ::

  <script src="dojo.js"></script>
  <script>
    require(["dojox/charting/Chart", "dojox/charting/BidiSupport"], ...);
  </script>

by

.. html ::

  <script src="dojo.js" data-dojo-config="has:{'dojo-bidi': true}"></script>
  <script>
    require(["dojox/charting/Chart"], ...);
  </script>
